# The genomic and epigenomic landscapes of hemizygous genes
**The genomic and epigenomic landscapes of hemizygous genes across crops with contrasting reproductive systems**

Hemizygous genes, present in only one of the two homologous chromosomes of diploid organisms, have been mainly studied in the context of sex chromosomes and sex-linked genes. However, structural variants (SVs), such as a deletion of one allele, can lead to hemizygous or haploid genes, and this phenomenon remains largely unexplored in plants. In this study, we investigated the genomic and epigenomic landscapes of hemizygous genes across 22 genomes with varying propagation histories: eleven clonal lineages, seven outcross, and four inbred and putatively homozygous genomes. By remapping long-sequencing (PacBio HiFi) reads to reference assemblies, we identified SVs leading to genic hemizygosity. As expected, very few genes (0.01%-1.1%) were hemizygous in the homozygous genomes, representing negative controls, but 10.5% to 17.6% were hemizygous in clonal samples. The lower proportions of hemizygous genes in the outcrossed samples reflect heterozygous SVs accumulation under clonal propagation. Compared to diploid genes, hemizygous genes were more often situated in low recombination regions and exhibited relaxed selection pressure. These genes had reduced levels of expression, with ~20% expression levels on average, violating the evolutionary model of dosage compensation. We also detected higher DNA methylation levels, on average, in hemizygous genes and transposable elements, a factor that may contribute to the reduced expression of hemizygous genes. Finally, expression profiles showed that hemizygous genes were more specifically expressed in contexts related to fruit development, organ differentiation, and stress responses. Overall, hemizygous genes accumulate in clonally propagated lineages and display distinct genomic, genetic, and epigenomic features compared to diploid genes.

**Keywords**: Clonal propagation, Structural variation, Integrative genomics, Heterozygous, Cis-regulation

# Methods
# Haplotype Genome Assembly
